In this chapter, we are
going to have a look at
how to secure microservices
communication
both by validating the origin of
incoming requests using CORS
and by securing the microservice
origin by using TLS and mutual TLS.
We are also going to put
this in practice in
a guided exercise and then we are
going to move on to how to
apply authentication authorization
rules and techniques to
Quarkus microservices and take a look
at that in an exercise as well.
At the end of the chapter, we have the
usual securing
microservices end of chapter,
review lab. Word on CORS first.
So the problem is not with
direct requests that,
for example, users make from the browser
by typing a URL into the address bar.
You can see where your,
request is going in that case.
And of course, if TLS and HTTPS are in use,
you can also verify that the response
is coming from the correct resource.
The issue is that many modern
web applications are dynamic,
so they download into the browser and then
they perform certain communication with
the backend microservices
using JavaScript and
sending JSON requests to some
microservices running in the back-end.
Now the issue here is that
a rogue attacker could
fool the browser into making requests
that aren't really authorized.
Or someone could have deployed
a rogue user interface
and try to make use of our microservices
from that rogue user interface.
And we need to be able to prevent that.
And the problem is that users generally do
not understand JavaScript well enough to,
see what's going on under
the hood of the browser.
They just see the reactions to
the Document Object Model
in the browser window.
And even if they do understand
JavaScript well enough,
if they are just users of an application,
they are not going to go and look for it.
Additionally, of course, if it's
a rogue user interface that is
trying to abuse our service,
there's nothing, there's no
control we have over that.
So what is the solution to
that distribution is actually
something called CORS,
Cross-origin resource sharing that allows
a web page to request resources
from an external domain.
So not from the domain
that it originated from,
but actually from some other
host name or other domain.
Generally images, style sheets,
and other resources aren't
an issue because they
typically bundled with
the web application on the same server,
Rest requests are. So,
how does CORS work? First of all,
most modern browsers enable
CORS, origin requests
by default. It is something that both
the browser needs to be able or capable of
doing and the server needs
to be capable of handling.
Now, what happens is when
an application loads in
a browser and send a request
to some external server,
not one that it originated from,
the browser actually adds a header.
Setting the Origin key to
the value of the server or
the host name that the web
application was loaded from
initially. Then the server that receives
this request, can recognize it,
and respond with an access control header
named Access-Control-Allow-Origin,
pointing to the fact that
the application coming from
some sort of a server is allowed
to actually make requests
to that other service.
Of course, it's always possible to
configure the back-end
application to allow any origin
and in that case it responds to the
request with Access-Control-Allow-Origin,
anything which is what the asterisk means.
For visualization of
what's going on in CORS,
let's assume a Frontend user interface.
Let's say one that the user downloads
into their browser from
myapp-fe.com
and the Backend API that this
application needs to use running
at myapp-backend.com.
Now the browser is running
the frontend user
interface and the JavaScript
makes an AJAX call to the Backend API.
Because the browser is a modern one,
it includes the origin header in the
request and the backend may respond.
Okay, I know you,
you can send me AJAX requests
and I will be happy to handle them.
If the attacker sets up a fake
user interface and the user
loads the application
from that fake host name,
say with the intent of
stealing data or doing
whatever breaches, that the
attacker might want to perform.
The browser is actually going to send to
the Backend API that the
fact that it's coming from
myfakeapp-fe.com and backend will
respond with the CORS error not
allowing the client to proceed.
Obviously during development, a wild card
CORS policy may be convenient,
but as we are moving towards production,
it becomes increasingly more important
to lock down the origins that we allow
the request from. CORS
actually allows us to specify
not just the origin host of the
request of the clients application,
but even control over the types of
HTTP methods that are performed
and of course, additional headers as well.
In Quarkus applications, CORS
is configured out of the box.
We just simply need to enable it by
setting quarkus.http.cors to true.
And then we can specify more
fine-grained configuration by
specifying which origins dynamic
requests may be coming from.
That is which origins the clients that are
invoking our backend APIs may load
the application from, so to speak.
Which methods are allowed and what
additional headers are going to be
allowed in CORS requests as well.
Of course, CORS is only
one layer of security,
we need to be able to secure
data in transit as well.
And for that we use TLS.
Transport Layer Security is a way of
encrypting network communications
and it's particularly important
whenever there is sensitive data involved,
which is practically anytime, any sort
of authentication is taking place
and anytime we are
shuffling back and forth
critical corporate data. TLS is based
around the concept of certificates,
and it works if you imagine that on
the left-hand side we
have microservice A,
on the right-hand side,
we have microservice B.
Let's say microservice A,
acting as a client is invoking
an endpoint in microservice B,
it wouldn't have been any
different if we were talking
about a web browser and a backend service.
But for our intents, it's going to be
more common to see chained microservices
communicating to each other,
we have to protect that
communication as well.
Now, let's say the client is
invoking the server. With
plain texts communication
all that happens is a request is send,
and a response is received.
That's it. With TLS though the
client connects to the server and says,
Hello, I want to speak HTTPS.
Do you have some sort of
identification document for me?
The server loads a
certificate from the key store
that is configured with the application
and sends it to the client.
The client then verifies
that the certificate is
trustworthy by looking at
its own trust store and
responds to the server by sending
its own private session key
encrypted with the server certificate,
which the server can then decrypt
because in addition to the certificate,
which is basically the public key.
It also has access to the private key,
which is needed to decrypt encrypted
communications send from the client.
So the client sends its own session key,
the server decrypts it,
encrypts the response with
the clients session key
and encrypted communication
can begin. Configuring TLS in
Quarkus is done in application.
properties file completely.
So there are 2 choices, you
can either provide PEM
encoded certificates or use a key store. We would
use key store in this course.
So the keytool is a tool that can be used to
generate a new certificate or key pairs.
What you would specifies the
type of the key, its size,
its validity, the distinguished
name for the server.
The important thing is
that the CN part maps to
the applications host name or to add
an extension subject alternative name,
specifying that the alternative name
could also be my server or IP of x, y, z.
And then simply store
everything into a key store,
which is protected by a password.
You can then configure Quarkus to
serve the certificate of that server
by specifying quarkus.http.ssl.
certificate.key-store-file option
pointing to the keystore file.
Of course, you need the keystore
password to decrypt it.
And you would provide that password
in that parameter and simply specify
the ssl-port if you want to,
something other than 8443,
which is the default, you can
set it using quarkus.http.
ssl-port. When loading Quarkus,
it first tries to load
whatever keystore file
you have specified from the classpath.
And even if it cannot find it,
then it will try reading
it from the file system.
There are several different types
of key stores that can be supplied.
So the quarkus.http.
ssl.certificate.key-store-file-type
can be used to set the keystore type 2,
one of the implementation
supported by the JVM.
If it's not specified,
Quarkus expects the keystone
to be in JKS format.
For your native builds
to be able to use TLS,
you have to set the quarkus.ssl.native property to true.
And actually it's also possible
to go even a step further
to disable the plain text port
and to do HTTPS exclusively.
You can do that by using
the quarkus.http.insecure-requests property.
If you disable it by
setting it to disabled,
then the port will not be opened at all.
If you set the value to redirect,
then plain text HTTP requests
will be responded to.
But with the redirect response,
that's an HTTP 302 response code
pointing to the secure port
on the HTTPS protocol.
This is probably the most
user-friendly option.
But if you have the need to serve both
encrypted and unencrypted traffic,
then you can simply set the quarkus.http.insecure-requests property to enabled.
Now TLS, as we have looked at it so far,
provides the server
identity to the client.
That is fine if the client is the browser,
if the user just wants to know that
they are really talking to someone
trustworthy and not a fake
implementation of the application.
Particularly because after
establishing secure communication,
the client will probably
have to authenticate
and to be able to access the application
anyway.
It's a little bit different with
microservices talking to each other.
In microservices talking to each other,
we will have a client that will request
the server to introduce itself by
presenting the server certificate and then
verify that the server is trustworthy.
But that's only one half of the story.
The server needs to know that the
client microservice is actually
microservice that is authorized
to perform these requests.
So with mutual TLS,
the server can also,
in addition to providing the
server certificate to the client,
challenge the client to provide
its own certificate as well.
And the client then has to have a
key store in addition to the trust store
and send back to the server, their own client certificate,
which the server can verify by having
its own trust or so. It's basically mutual
TLS is literally just TLS done both ways.
First, the client asks for
identification and gets it.
Then as the server provides a response
at the same time, it also says,
what about you, where are your credentials and
then the client has to do the same thing
in regards to the server. How we configure
this in Quarkus, is just a couple
of extra steps. When we have
already established one-way TLS,
we need to, first of all,
generates a keystore for the client as well,
containing the clients
private and public key.
Then use keytool to export the public
key from the client's keystore,
export it to a file.
And then use keytool to import the
client's public key into a truststore;
truststore are usually also encrypted.
We take that truststore and
place it onto the server.
Then we configure the server,
telling it where the trust-store-file
is containing trusted certificates,
what the password to access that file is,
and this is the crucial bit.
We set quarkus.http.ssl.client-auth to
required. That switches from optional
mutual TLS to required mutual TLS.
Now that means after the client had
been sent the server certificate,
if they do not also provide
their own certificate,
and if that certificate is
not found in the trust or
they will be refused service. If the client is microservice,
which obviously usually it is,
we have to add some extra
mp-rest properties for
the rest easy clients to be able to
perform that mutual TLS authentication.
So for the interface class
that the client is using,
in addition to specifying the
URL where it should connect.
We add the truststore
location to the properties.
We add the trustStorePassword
of course,
that is for the verification
of the server certificate.
And then we also add the keyStore
paths containing the client's
private and public key and the key
store location as well, of course.
So Quarkus does enable you to
implement secure communication
on the network layer.
But this is obviously
something you have to do for
each microservice individually.
It does not scale well for applications or
for corporate environments that
have thousands of microservices.
So there is another option,
there is another approach
to do it on a larger scale
where the special control plane,
which we can deploy in
our platform as a service
environment such as OpenShift.
For OpenShift that
control plane is called Red
Hat OpenShift Service Mesh.
That control plane can be configured with
policies that automatically
issue certificates to
individual microservices in the
form mutual TLS configuration as
and as a layer above the
application configuration.
So its functionality
that is implemented and
provided to the applications by
the control plane of the environment
that they are deployed to,
so the applications do not have to be
specifically configured to do that.
If you are interested in that kind of
approach to implementing security and
fault tolerance and many other things that
we have actually discussed
in this course so far,
you can have a look at
the DO328 course,
which is also included in your
Red Hat Learning subscription.
It is about Red Hat OpenShift Service Mesh.
Let's move on to the next video,
which is the exercise where we
configure secure communication
between microservices.